.. _donations:

How can I donate money to the project?
======================================

Since February 2022, you are invited to fund the Orthanc project
through its `Open Collective <https://opencollective.com/orthanc>`__
page.  The funds collected there will help us maintain Orthanc,
release new features and answer questions on the Orthanc Users Group.

If you are a **commercial company** that builds upon the Orthanc
ecosystem for your own products, you may also contribute by buying the
:ref:`professional services offered by our community
<support-freelancers>`. Doing so creates a healthy
ecosystem around the project where companies are encouraged to
contribute their resources to improve the project to create a larger
pool of potential customers wanting their services. A :ref:`list of
freelancers <support-freelancers>` is available in this Orthanc Book.

If you are part of a **research team**, you are invited to involve
`SÃ©bastien Jodogne's research lab
<https://uclouvain.be/fr/repertoires/sebastien.jodogne>`__ at the
UCLouvain university in your scientific publications and in your
research projects. The typical subjects of interest of this research
lab are artificial intelligence, medical interoperability and
vizualization techniques applied to bioimaging.

We appreciate **positive feedback** on our project as well. If you are
on Twitter, send us a tweet to `@OrthancServer
<https://twitter.com/OrthancServer>`__. That helps raise awareness of
our project so others can benefit from it as well.

Finally, don't forget to have a look :ref:`other ways to contribute
<contributing>` to the Orthanc project.
